Remove officially unmaintained collections (#214)
ansible-collections/overview: removal_from_ansible.rst

Unmaintained collections
========================

Collections that have been announced deprecated / unmaintained by their maintainers
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Process
~~~~~~~

#. `Announce upcoming removal from the next major Ansible release <announce_removal_>`_.

> #. `Remove collection from the next major Ansible release <remove_collection_>`_.

Reviewer: Picking a corner case here - What if a collection owner decides it's deprecated/unmaintained late in an Ansible development cycle?  Say foo.bar collection is deprecated a week before the Ansible 10 alpha - do we still remove it in Ansible 10?

Author: @samccann Good point, we should clarify this.

In this case, I think we should remove the collection since it's only an alpha release. That's not late, it's early in the development cycle. But probably not once there's a pre-release that comes with a feature freeze (Ansible-10.0.0 beta1).

What do you think about:

```
If the current major release is X and there hasn't been a feature freeze release of the next major version X+1:

#. `Announce upcoming removal from the (X+1).0.0 Ansible release <announce_removal_>`_.
#. `Remove collection from the (X+1).0.0 Ansible release <remove_collection_>`_.

If there already has been a feature freeze release of the next major version X+1:

#. `Announce upcoming removal from the (X+2).0.0 Ansible release <announce_removal_>`_.
#. `Remove collection from the (X+2).0.0 Ansible release <remove_collection_>`_.
```

Reviewer 2: Or simply define a new variable `Y` which is `X+1` or `X+2`, and then use `Y`, to avoid having the list of instructions twice :)

Author: @samccann Or, as @felixfontein suggested, simplify this using a variable `Y`:

```
If the current major release is X and there hasn't been a feature freeze release of the next major version X+1, remove the collection from Y=(X+1).0.0.
If there already has been a feature freeze release of the next major version X+1, remove the collection from Y=(X+2).0.0.

#. `Announce upcoming removal from the (Y Ansible release <announce_removal_>`_.
#. `Remove collection from the Y Ansible release <remove_collection_>`_.
```

Reviewer 2: There's now an opening bracket in the first `#.` line that shouldn't be there, but besides from that, LGTM.

> See `<https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/pull/374/files>`__ for an example on how to this in just one PR in ``ansible-build-data``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See `the example pull request <https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/pull/374/files>`_ in the ``ansible-build-data`` repository to learn how to remove the collection.
```

Unmaintained collections
========================

> Collections that have been announced deprecated / unmaintained by their maintainers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Removing a collection that has been explicitly deprecated or abandoned by its former maintainers
```

Author: I don't like "former maintainers" here. When they deprecate or abandon the collection, they are still the maintainers. They are only _former maintainers_ afterwards.

What I mean is: Only _current_ maintainers can deprecate or abandon a collection. What do you think about my [last commit](https://github.com/ansible-collections/overview/pull/214/commits/81c1150dc3970d46f23c503e0e9822db804fd36a)?

Reviewer 4: It's not a big deal either way, but when this process is taking place they are the former maintainers so it feels weird to call them the maintainers. The collection currently has no maintainers, or else it would not be eligible for this process.

Author: @Andersson007 @briantist @felixfontein @russoz @samccann What do you think, "former maintainers" or just "maintainers"? Personally, I don't like the "former" but I'm open to both.

Reviewer 2: Deprecated collections can still be maintained. Only when they are unmaintained or abandoned (is there actually a difference between the two?) they no longer have maintainers. So depending on context, both can be the right wording. So how about writing `(former) maintainers`?

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Process
~~~~~~~

If the current major release is X and there hasn't been a feature freeze release of the next major version X+1, remove the collection from Y=(X+1).0.0.
If there already has been a feature freeze release of the next major version X+1, remove the collection from Y=(X+2).0.0.

#. `Announce upcoming removal from the Y Ansible release <announce_removal_>`_.
#. `Remove collection from the Y Ansible release <remove_collection_>`_.

See `the example pull request <https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/pull/374/files>`_ in the ``ansible-build-data`` repository to learn how to remove the collection.

> Identifying and removing an unmaintained collection that has not been deprecated by their maintainers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Identifying and removing an unmaintained collection that has not been deprecated by its maintainers
```

Process
~~~~~~~

If the latest stable Ansible version is X.something:

#. Announce upcoming removal in the Ansible changelog (``https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/blob/main/<X>/changelog.yaml``).
#. Remove from ``ansible.in`` (``https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/blob/main/<X+1>/ansible.in``).
#. Remove from ``collection-meta.yaml`` (``https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/blob/main/<X+1>/collection-meta.yaml``).

> #. Document actual removal for the next Ansible release in the changelog (``https://github.com/ansible-community/ansible-build-data/blob/main/<X+1>/changelog.yaml``).

Reviewer 2: The goal of referring to the general processes inside this document was to avoid repeating these instructions everywhere.

Author: I understand, but referring to `announce removal` and `remove collection` looks like there are two separate steps. I think we can do it in just one step. The process I propose is not simply `announce removal` + `remove collection` ;-)

Additionally, `Announcing upcoming removal` says to `announce upcoming removal in the collection's issue tracker`. Which doesn't make sense if the collection is officially unmaintained. And, actually, wouldn't even be possible if the collection has been archived.

Reviewer 4: I don't see the point of two divergent processes for doing the exact same thing, or duplicating documentation details in order to do so. If you think that in some circumstances announcing it on the collection's issue tracker won't be possible, just add an "if possible" on the end of the existing documentation for that step.

Author: @felixfontein @flowerysong What do you think about my latest commit? Does it look OK to you now?
